Explain why we reverted back to GraalVM 19.2 in 1.1.0.Final (#400)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2019-12-17-why-graalvm-19-2.adoc

---
layout: post
title: 'Why Quarkus 1.1.0.Final will still use GraalVM 19.2'
date: 2019-12-17
tags: quarkus
synopsis: For Quarkus 1.1.0.Final, we had to take the hard decision to go back to GraalVM 19.2 while our CR1 used 19.3. Here is why. 
author: gsmet
---

> One of the highly anticipated features of Quarkus 1.1.0.CR1 was the GraalVM 19.3 support. GraalVM 19.3 changes quite a lot of things so it was a all or nothing update: it wasn't possible to support GraalVM 19.2 and 19.3 together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the highly anticipated features of Quarkus 1.1.0.CR1 was the GraalVM 19.3 support. GraalVM 19.3 changes quite a lot of things so it was an all-or-nothing update for us as we couldn't support both GraalVM 19.2 and 19.3 at the same time.
```

Supporting 19.3 was quite a struggle. We had several regressions, some due to Quarkus not doing the right thing (we fixed it), some due to GraalVM regressions (we worked hand in hand with the GraalVM team to fix them). Considering the next micro bugfix release of GraalVM is planned for mid-January, we were on our own to work around the GraalVM issues by tweaking Quarkus and writing substitutions.

Even if it wasn't pretty, the end result was solid enough that we decided to ship CR1 with GraalVM 19.3 support.

And, yet, our 1.1.0.Final is back to GraalVM 19.2. It was a hard decision, believe us, especially with all the work invested to get things ready for 1.1. So why this step back?

== We don't want to break our promise

> One of Quarkus promises is that your Quarkus application running with the JVM could be compiled to a native executable with no hassle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of Quarkus promises is that your Quarkus application running with the JVM should be compiled to a native executable with no hassle.
```

Due to a number of issues, it wasn't the case anymore:

>  * We have https://github.com/oracle/graal/issues/1927[a concurrency issue striking randomly] meaning sometimes your native image build will fail with no good reason;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * We have https://github.com/oracle/graal/issues/1927[a concurrency issue striking randomly] meaning sometimes your native image build will fail for no good reason;
```

>  * Some Java code triggers a number of low-level issues: https://github.com/oracle/graal/issues/1995 broke our Neo4j extension (and more generally Neo4j support in GraalVM), with https://github.com/oracle/graal/issues/1971, we were not able to build native images for some of our Camel Quarkus integration tests. While we could have lived with the latter, it also means it could happen to any of your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Some Java code triggers a number of low-level issues: https://github.com/oracle/graal/issues/1995 broke our Neo4j extension (and more generally Neo4j support in GraalVM), with https://github.com/oracle/graal/issues/1971, we were not able to build native images for some of our Camel Quarkus integration tests. While we could have lived with the latter, it also means it could happen to any of your applications.
```

These issues alone were pushing for reverting, even if we weren't excited about it,  but, unfortunately, we had one more issue that sealed the deal.

== RSS (memory) usage regression

After the 1.1.0.CR1 release, we got report that our RSS usage numbers at startup were not as good as before. RSS measures the resident size of the process i.e. all the memory consumed by the process.

When I say "not as good", I'm understating things a bit, the regression was quite dramatic: we went from 14 MB to 63 MB for our simple REST application. This is clearly not acceptable.

We still haven't got to the bottom of it but reverting to GraalVM 19.2 got us back our good numbers so it's definitely something related to the new GraalVM: it's either related to GraalVM itself or caused by a change of behavior of some of our components with the new GraalVM. For now, our investigations are leading us to think it's due to some changes in the GraalVM architecture.

If you are interested in knowing more about it, see https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/6136[the Quarkus issue] and https://github.com/oracle/graal/issues/1984[its companion GraalVM issue].

== So now what?

> Well, first, be prepared to downgrade your GraalVM installation for the upcoming 1.1.0.Final.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Well, first, be prepared to downgrade your GraalVM installation to 19.2.1 for the upcoming 1.1.0.Final.
```
